<h1 align="center"> IMEX-RB: fast and stable numerical time integration </h1>

<h3 align="center"> <a href="https://arxiv.org/"> "IMEX-RB: a self-adaptive implicit–explicit time integration method by reduced bases" </a>  </h3>

<h5 align="center">  Micol Bassanini, Simone Deparis, Francesco Sala, Riccardo Tenderini </h5>


<h4 align="center">  Abstract </h4>

<p align="center">  In this work, we introduce a self-adaptive implicit-explicit (IMEX) time integration scheme for the numerical integration of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), arising from spatial discretizations of partial differential equations (PDEs) by finite difference methods. Leveraging the Reduced Basis (RB) method, at each timestep we project the high-fidelity problem onto a low-dimensional subspace, assembled starting from the solution history, and integrate its dynamics implicitly. Following the IMEX paradigm, the resulting solution serves then as an educated guess within a full-order explicit step. In this paper, we present the first-order formulation of IMEX-RB, demonstrating and showcasing its convergence and stability properties. In particular, under appropriate conditions on the method's hyperparameters, IMEX-RB is unconditionally stable. The theoretical analysis is corroborated by numerical experiments performed on representative model problems in two and three dimensions. The results demonstrate that our approach can outperform conventional time integration schemes like backward Euler (BE). Indeed, IMEX-RB yields high-fidelity accurate solutions, provided that its main hyperparameters - namely the reduced basis size and the stability tolerance - are suitably tuned. Moreover, there exists a range of time step sizes - larger than the stability threshold of the explicit Euler method - within which IMEX-RB achieves tangible computational gains over backward Euler. </p>

## Repository Structure

```
IMEX-RB/
├── src/                        # Core implementation
│   ├── imexrb.py               # IMEX-RB implementation
│   ├── euler.py                # Implementation of BE and FE methods
│   ├── newton.py               # Newton method for nonlinear eqs
│   └── problemPDE.py           # Class for space discretization of PDEs
│
├── numerical_tests/            # Numerical tests
│   ├── run_all_tests.py        # Script to run all tests
│   ├── advDiff2D/              # 2D advection-diffusion tests
│   ├── burgers2D/              # 2D Burgers' equation tests
│   └── advDiff3D/              # 3D advection-diffusion tests
│
── postprocessing/              # Postprocess results
│   ├── plot_all.py             # Script to generate all figs
│   ├── AdvDiff/                # For advection-diffusion results
│   │   └── plots/              # Directory for generated plots
│   └── Burgers2D/              # For Burgers' equation results
│       └── plots/              # Directory for generated plots
│
├── notebooks/                  # Example notebooks
│   ├── advdiff2D.ipynb         # Example of 2D advection-diffusion (make Figure 1)
│   
├── __RESULTS/                  # Storage for simulation results (to be created)
│
└── README.md                   # Repository documentation   
```

## Reproducibility

### Prerequisites

Ensure you have Python 3.x installed along with the required dependencies.
We recommend creating a virtual environment with:

```bash
python -m venv venv-imexrb
source venv-imexrb/bin/activate  
```

Install the necessary packages with:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

If you are using conda, create the following `environment.yml` file:
```bash
name: venv-imexrb
channels:
  - conda-forge
  - defaults
dependencies:
  - (list all dependencies of requirements.txt)
```
and run from command line:
```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```
### Running the numerical tests

To reproduce the results from our analysis, navigate the directory `numerical_tests/` and execute the Python script `run_all_tests.py`. This will run the entire batch of numerical tests necessary to generate the figures accompanying the publication and create a dir `__RESULTS/` inside the repo. N.B.: running all tests can require several hours of computational time. On the JED cluster of EPFL, the sequential run required roughly 25h. Besides, all subdir of `numerical_tests/` contains a `main.py` file, which enables running a single test according to the parameter defined in the `config.py` file.

### Generating the figures

Once the numerical simulations are run, a directory `__RESULTS/` is created. To postprocess the results and reproduce the plots presented in the article, navigate the `postprocessing/` directory, then run the `plot_all.py` script. This will generate all the figures inside `postprocessing/problem_name/plots/`, where `problem_name/` can be either `AdvDiff` (handling both 2D and 3D case) or `Burgers2D`. Note that Figure 1 is instead generated by running the notebook `notebooks/advdiff2d.ipynb`.

## Citation

If you use this code in your research, please cite our work:

```bibtex
@misc{bassanini2025imexrbselfadaptiveimextime,
      title={IMEX-RB: a self-adaptive IMEX time integration scheme exploiting the RB method}, 
      author={Micol Bassanini and Simone Deparis and Francesco Sala and Riccardo Tenderini},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2506.16470},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={math.NA},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.16470}, 
}
```

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Acknowledgments

SD and RT would like to thank the *Swiss National Science Foundation* (grant agreement No 200021\_197021, ''Data-driven approximation
of hemodynamics by combined reduced order modeling and deep neural networks''). Moreover, this work has been carried out within the framework of the EUROfusion Consortium, funded by the European Union via the Euratom Research and Training Programme (Grant Agreement No 101052200 — EUROfusion). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Commission. Neither the European Union nor the European Commission can be held responsible for them. 

EPFL, Lausanne, July 2025.
